South
Africa’s communications service providers are unanimous that 5G will be a key
enabler of the Fourth Industrial Revolution. This is a core finding of a new
study by World Wide Worx, released today.



Titled “5G
prospects for South Africa in 2021: The Operators”, the study is based on
interviews with the country’s four major mobile network operators, and 21
Internet and communications service providers.



“Network
infrastructure and mobile networking standards are consistently evolving,
providing unprecedented opportunity for enablement, innovation and economic
development,” says Arthur Goldstuck, managing director of World Wide Worx. “However,
network providers in South Africa have not been provided with adequate spectrum
to facilitate the upgrading of these networks and make most efficient use of
these communication technologies, or to achieve their full potential.”



The advent
of 5G has brought this issue into sharp focus, emphasising the vast
possibilities of communication technology, as well as the gap that exists in
South Africa between the spectrum resources available and those utilised.



World Wide
Worx conducted the study with the primary aim of understanding:



the importance of mobile spectrum pricing in the long term,how current spectrum auctions influence a mobile network’s ability to obtain spectrum,the importance of spectrum allocation for innovation,the importance of reasonably priced mobile spectrum for the economy, andthe social and economic impact of 5G deployment.



“Based on the research findings, it is evident that
operators require expedited allocation of spectrum that holds the following
characteristics: contiguous and not fragmented, reasonably priced, and not
interfered with by other radio signals,” says Goldstuck.



Providers
were unanimous that a high price for bidding on spectrum will have direct
impact on quality of service. At the end of September 2020, the regulator, Independent
Communications Authority of South Africa (Icasa), will issue an Invitation to
Apply (ITA) for spectrum that is appropriate for high-speed mobile broadband.



“It is no
coincidence that the release of the report comes shortly before the issuing of
the ITA,” says Goldstuck. “We believed it was important for a consolidated view
of the industry to be available to Icasa ahead of the invitation.”



The
spectrum is due to be issued in three main bands, namely 700-800 MhZ, referred
to as low-frequency bands, and high frequency spectrum across the 2.3GHz-2.6GHz
and 3.5GHz bands. Collectively, these are referred to as “high-demand
spectrum”, and the mid-frequency bands are generally regarded as
appropriate for 4G services.



Significant
blocks of high-demand spectrum have not been issued to the major network
operators by Icasa since 2005, when it allowed use of the 2.1GHz band for the
roll-out of 3G networks by Vodacom and MTN. Cell C was allocated spectrum in
2011. Since then, operators have had to “refarm” 3G spectrum to facilitate the
roll-out of 4G to consumers. As a result, investment that could have been made
in providing affordable access to customers was diverted to servicing technical
issues.



Along with reasonable pricing, service providers say instalment payments of spectrum should be made available as an incentive. This will allow the regulator to charge prices which they deem fair while giving operators cash flow breaks from paying for spectrum in a lump sum. 



The urgency of
digital migration of TV signals from analogue to digital was also raised by
service providers as a key to using the 700 and 800MHz spectrum bands,
currently used by analogue TV broadcast.  Digital migration will result in more
efficient use of signals, freeing up large segments of spectrum for Internet
access.



“The industry believes that digital migration should be
prioritised with extreme urgency to maximise the usefulness an operator can get
from their temporary allocation,” says Goldstuck. “Until then, deployments over
this band segment will be hindered by quality of service issues.”



Ultimately, the study finds, the allocation of new spectrum
is an opportunity to utilise communications technology for economic development
for the country as a whole. It will form a foundation stone for the roll-out of
technologies underlying the Fourth Industrial Revolution, such as artificial
intelligence, the Internet of Things, autonomous technologies, and cloud
computing. 



“Consequently, regulators and government must avoid the pressure to advantage a small number of applicants that do not enable the spread of benefits, and ensure that the power and potential of 5G benefit the maximum number of South Africans,” says Goldstuck.



For more information on the report, our research services, or corporate presentations, email World Wide Worx.



To download the 5G prospects for South Africa in 2021: The Operators report, fill in the form below:



                
                        
                            5G prospects for South Africa in 2021
                            Provide your details below to download the 5G prospects for South Africa in 2021 report.
                        
                        First name*Surname*Name of company, organisation or institution (If none, say Private)*Email*
                                
                                    
                                    Enter Email
                                
                                
                                    
                                    Confirm Email
                                
                                
                            
                            
          
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
        
                        
                         jQuery(document).bind('gform_post_render', function(event, formId, currentPage){if(formId == 5) {} } );jQuery(document).bind('gform_post_conditional_logic', function(event, formId, fields, isInit){} ); jQuery(document).ready(function(){jQuery(document).trigger('gform_post_render', [5, 1]) } );