The Covid-19 pandemic has pushed cloud computing to the front of  decision-makers minds, according to the new Cloud in Africa 2020 Report¹.  



Released
 today by market research leaders World Wide Worx, in partnership with 
F5, Dell Technologies, Digicloud Africa, and Intel, the study is the 
most comprehensive overview of existing and future cloud trends across 
the African continent yet.  



Against
 the backdrop of a global pandemic, a near unanimous 91% of surveyed 
respondents deemed cloud computing to be “important” in helping with 
business’ response to the crisis. 



Since
 the outbreak, the technology platform has been used primarily for 
disaster recovery (91%) and remote working (82%), followed by customer 
service activities (52%). Furthermore, eight out of ten respondents 
(80%) believe that cloud computing has made a significant contribution 
to governments’ efforts in dealing with the pandemic. The most common 
uses by governments were remote working (69%), public communications 
(55%), and crisis coordination (50%). 



During
 this time, historic perceptions of cloud being costly and risky have 
also largely dissipated. As many as 84% of respondents now believe cloud
 computing is “cost-effective” and only 12% regard it as inherently 
“risky”. 



“Covid-19
 has clearly catalysed decision-makers’ receptivity to the cloud in 
recent months, but a significant momentum was already building across 
Africa,” says Arthur Goldstuck, managing director of World Wide Worx and
 lead analyst on the project. 



“The
 transition to digital channels will likely continue beyond the pandemic
 as organisations adopt fundamentally different ways of working. In many
 cases, it is prompting different architectural solutions for expansion,
 such as ‘cloud bursting’ and augmenting on-premises deployments with 
virtual appliances.”  



Investing in the future 



The
 Cloud in Africa 2020 report shows that 38% of decision-makers increased
 their cloud services spend last year. South Africa led the way, with 
82% stating that they had increased cloud spend, followed by 59% in 
Zimbabwe, and 50% in both Nigeria and Botswana. 



According
 to World Wide Worx, cloud investment is also growing as a percentage of
 overall IT budgets, particularly in countries with traditionally less 
mature IT markets. For 71% of Zambian respondents, between a quarter and
 half of their IT budgets are allocated to the cloud. The same is true 
for 59% in Zimbabwe, and 56% in Malawi. In Namibia, 65% said more than 
half of IT budgets were focused on cloud. In Botswana, 14% reported that
 100% of budgets went to cloud-related IT.  



Meanwhile,
 in South Africa, which is the region’s most mature cloud market, 45% of
 decision-makers indicated that cloud accounted for less than a quarter 
of IT budgets. 34% said it was between a quarter and half, and 11% put 
it above three quarters. 



In
 2021, almost two-thirds (61%) of all respondents are set to increase 
investments in cloud services. 36% expect investment to remain at 
current levels, and only 1% anticipate decreasing spend. Significantly, 
more than half of all respondents (56%) estimate that over a quarter of 
applications will have moved to the cloud by the end of this year.
 “Africa’s embrace of cloud computing is clearly accelerating with 
purpose, which will have a profound impact on organisations’ abilities 
to innovate, create new services and compete on both a regional and 
global level,” said Samir Sehil, F5 regional cloud sales manager for the
 Middle East, Turkey and Africa.“Across
 the region, it is also hugely encouraging to see that businesses are 
starting to tailor cloud infrastructures to their specific needs by 
using multi-cloud application services. As cloud- and container-native 
application architectures mature and scale in Africa, we expect to see 
far more organizations deploying related app services, such as Ingress 
control and service discovery, both on premises and in the public 
cloud.” 



Benefits and risks 



While
 there are some regional variations in strategic benefits, 40% of 
respondents believe that cloud computing has had a direct, positive 
impact on market share in the past two years.  The single biggest 
benefit cited by respondents is business efficiency (63%), followed by 
agility and operational flexibility (53%), and improved customer service
 (45%). Improved time-to-market was also an importance outcome for over a
 third of respondents (37%).  



Cloud
 computing also emerged as a powerful platform for intangible elements 
of organisations’ internal strategy. Almost two-thirds (67%) reported an
 improvement in cross-organisation innovation due to the cloud. Over 
half (55%) also experienced noticeable brand perception improvements.  



“Typically,
 businesses have hesitated to digitally transform and adopt the cloud, 
mainly because change is difficult,” says Nick Treurnicht, Digicloud 
Africa. customer engineer. 



“Since
 the pandemic, the will of leaders to change at pace has increased by an
 order of magnitude.  The situation has clearly proved that this type of
 rapid adaptation is possible and, crucially, that businesses can thrive
 in the cloud.”  



When
 it comes to risk, the biggest concern for most is still the potential 
for a data breach (63% of respondents). The main, and closely related, 
multi-cloud challenge in Africa is the need to apply consistent security
 policies across all applications and their locations. 
Nevertheless, as many as 50% claim to be addressing the issue by 
building cloud security strategies on a per-app basis. 




 “Complexity is usually the biggest barrier to reaping the efficiency 
benefits offered by cloud,” says Greg McDonald, director of systems 
engineering at Dell Technologies South Africa.  “However, the 
multi-cloud doesn’t have to be complex.  



“The  right platform can integrate all the different components and give a  clear view of cloud operation. These can then be scheduled, automated  and analysed in real-time. More than ever, companies can extend their  hybrid cloud systems interfaces easily and get rid of the management  complexity.”



For more information on the report, our research services, or corporate presentations, email World Wide Worx.



To download the Cloud in Africa 2020 report, fill in the form below:



                
                        
                            Cloud in Africa 2020
                            Provide your details below to download the Cloud in Africa 2020 report.
                        
                        First name*Surname*Name of company, organisation or institution (If none, say Private)*Email*
                                
                                    
                                    Enter Email
                                
                                
                                    
                                    Confirm Email
                                
                                
                            
                            
          
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
        
                        
                         jQuery(document).bind('gform_post_render', function(event, formId, currentPage){if(formId == 4) {} } );jQuery(document).bind('gform_post_conditional_logic', function(event, formId, fields, isInit){} ); jQuery(document).ready(function(){jQuery(document).trigger('gform_post_render', [4, 1]) } );