Two-thirds (67%) of South African small businesses struggle to source the right tech talent,
according to research from
the global small business platform Xero.
Despite struggling to hire, only 14% planned to upskill their existing team members to help close tech skills gaps. 



Virtually
 every small business in South Africa has adopted technology they now 
rely on, with 97% investing in new technologies in 2019. Adoption of 
cloud accounting leapt from 13% in
2017 to 61% in 2020, indicating that more than half of small businesses 
can now manage their finances remotely. Despite this, it is clear that 
many small businesses don’t have the right skills to support the shift. 



Before the lockdown 
regulations, 61% of small companies planned to allocate a portion of 
their budget to tech training. However, as many SMEs had to make 
difficult staffing decisions during the lockdown, much of
this money will have been redirected. 



Colin Timmis, Country Manager at Xero South Africa and professional accountant, said:  “It’s great to see small businesses embracing digital tools, but  investing in technology is only the first step.  Many small businesses don’t yet  have the skills to match. We need a greater focus from government and  technology firms on closing this gap, and helping small businesses  develop the right skills to build back faster and stronger from this crisis.



“If you are struggling to
 hire external talent, focus on upskilling tech champions in your 
current teams. Even if your budget is modest, look at what skills you 
currently have in your organisation that can be built
on, make use of free online training and ask for help. For example, your
 accountant will be able to advise on digitising finances and talk to 
other business owners who’ve implemented new tech recently.” 



When asked which skills gaps existed in their team, the biggest gaps that respondents reported
 were in cloud computing  (39%), programming and app development (33%), 
digital product management
(12%), digital project management (10%), and digital design (9%). To try
 and close the gap, a little more than half (55%) said that they had 
invested in improving cloud and tech skills over the last year.  



Sasha Sanders, Founder of Conscious Company, which assists organisations with culture, communication and storytelling, said:  “The concept of a learning or growth mindset – those who want to learn new things are open to more information and  enthusiastic about expanding their skills – as opposed to a fixed  mindset, is something more and more organisations are talking about.  We  know that things are changing and will continue to change. We’ve heard that the jobs today’s kids will have in a decade  or two don’t exist right now.



“So, training and 
upskilling people – or enabling them to gain broader and deeper 
expertise – is essential. It’s also critical to retaining people. 
Employees, especially younger ones, actively seek employers who
put a focus on learning and development, so it will be key for 
attracting new talent too.”



Arthur Goldstuck, technology analyst and founder of World Wide Worx said: “The  research shows quite clearly that all businesses are becoming, to a  greater or lesser extent, technology-driven. The cloud is now at the heart of  almost every business, which explains why cloud computing skills  represent the single biggest skills gap across all SMEs. We’ve already  seen more than half of SMEs investing in cloud and tech skills. With the digital revolution that occurred as a result of  Covid-19 and remote working, this trend will only accelerate.”



The findings are from Xero’s
fourth annual State of Small Business report, conducted earlier this year in partnership with World
Wide Worx (WWW)
and based on responses from 400 small business owners and 200 
accountants. The research highlights the areas in which small businesses
 need support and their progress in digital adoption.  



Other key findings from the research include:



 Over half (53%) of businesses found that adopting technology resulted in ‘somewhat big’ or ‘big’ increases to their profitability.A third (33%) of small businesses reported that they are finding it hard to keep pace with tech developments, despite good progress.More than two in five (41%) businesses indicated that they’re only just keeping up with technology.



                
                        
                            State of Small Business in South Africa 2020
                            Provide your details below to download the 5G prospects for South Africa in 2021 report.
                        
                        First name*Surname*Name of company, organisation or institution (If none, say Private)*Email*
                                
                                    
                                    Enter Email
                                
                                
                                    
                                    Confirm Email
                                
                                
                            
                            
          
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
        
                        
                         jQuery(document).bind('gform_post_render', function(event, formId, currentPage){if(formId == 6) {} } );jQuery(document).bind('gform_post_conditional_logic', function(event, formId, fields, isInit){} ); jQuery(document).ready(function(){jQuery(document).trigger('gform_post_render', [6, 1]) } );